First version of User Guide (#6)
deepesdl/deepesdl-doc: docs/guide/user-guide.md

# User guide

> In the user guide you can find a description of all components belonging to 

Reviewer: the ->this

> In the user guide you can find a description of all components belonging to 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This user guide helps you getting started with the main components of 
```

DeepESDL.

> There are three components of DeepESDL: 

Reviewer: "The growing set of DeepESDL's general functionalities comprises:"

1. [DeepESDL JupyterLab](#deepesdl-jupyterlab)
2. [DeepESDL xcube viewer](#deepesdl-xcube-viewer)

> 3. [DeepESDL datacube resources](#deepesdl-datacube-resources)

Reviewer: 4. [DeepESDL data cube generation] (# deepesdl-datacube-generation)

Here, we describe our general approach of data cube generation and refer to i) example notebooks for ad hoc generation by users and ii) recipes for published, reproducible cubes and the cube specification.

> 3. [DeepESDL datacube resources](#deepesdl-datacube-resources)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. [DeepESDL datacubes](#deepesdl-datacube-resources)
```

To me _Datacube resources_  sounds like resources attached to or required for datacubes.

# DeepESDL JupyterLab

## Basic usage

This section provides a brief introduction for users to the basic features of

> the JupyterLab environment as deployed on the DeepESDL system. 

Reviewer: as offered by DeepESDL.

For more in-depth documentation on the various components, see the links in the

> [‘Further information’ section](#further-information).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
section [Further Information](#further-information).
```

### Logging in and starting the JupyterLab profile

To use the DeepESDL JupyterLab environment, navigate to
<https://deep.earthsystemdatalab.net/> with a web browser (a recent version of
Firefox, Chrome, or Safari is recommended).

> DeepESDL uses a GitHub to authenticate, so if you are already registered as a 

Reviewer: DeepESDL uses GitHub to authenticate
User must be registered first. We thus need a sentence lie: Before first usage, we will have to register you with the system. To this end, we kindly ask you to duly compete the registration dialogue (link)/write as an email/...

DeepESDL user, please use your GitHub account to log in. 
If your Jupyter server is not already running, you may be presented
with a menu of user JupyterLab profiles to use for your session; there might be 
one or more JupyterLab profiles to choose from, depending on the computational 

> resources needs of your team. Please select an adequate JupyterLab profiles for 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
resources needs of your team. Please select a suitable profile for 
```

> your current task; it might not always require the strongest computational 

Reviewer: strongest -> all available computational resources.

resources available.

> After choosing your environment, you will see a progress bar appear for a few 

Reviewer: appearing

seconds while it is started for you. 
The JupyterLab interface will then appear in your web browser, ready for
use.

> ### Choosing a JupyterLab profile

Reviewer 2: Note, you already discussed above which profile to choose.

If you don't already have a running DeepESDL Jupyter session, you will be 
presented with a list of one or more available user JupyterLab profiles when 
you log in. 

> A user JupyterLab profiles provides a particular combination of pre-installed 

Reviewer: A JupyterLab profile

package versions and resource settings. 

> If you have already started your session and need to change JupyterLab profiles, 

Reviewer: profile

> you can do this by selecting ‘Hub control panel’ from the ‘File’ menu within

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you can do this by selecting *Hub control panel* from the *File* menu within
```

To me, putting phrases in quotation marks is indicating either quotes, code string literals, verbatim speech, or ironic meaning. Therefore I prefer highlighting of UI elements via font style.

JupyterLab. Then click the ‘Stop my server’ button and wait for your current
server to shut down. When the ‘Start my server’ button appears, you can click
on it to return to the user JupyterLab profiles menu.

### Logging out

To log out, select ‘Log out’ from the ‘File’ menu within JupyterLab. 

Note that your JupyterLab session will continue in the background even after
you have logged out, but will eventually be terminated due to inactivity. 
If you wish to stop your session explicitly,
you can use the hub control panel as described in the 
[Choosing a JupyterLab profile](#choosing-a-jupyterlab-profile) section above.

# DeepESDL xcube viewer

> The DeepESDL xcube viewer is reachable via 

Reviewer: reachable at

> https://viewer.earthsystemdatalab.net/ .

Reviewer: https://viewer.earthsystemdatalab.net

![img.png](../img/xcube-viewer.png)

> The viewer currently shows public datasets, and later will allow to see 

Reviewer: contains public datasets only, but will later also provide user cubes when logged in.

team/user cubes when logged in. The login will be via GitHub as for the DeepESDL

> JupyterLab. 

Reviewer: The login will be the same as for the DeepESDL JupyterLab.

> For the functionality of the viewer, please refer to the documentation:
> https://xcube.readthedocs.io/en/latest/viewer.html#functionality

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a more detailed description of the viewer functionality, please refer to a dedicated section in the
[xcube documentation](https://xcube.readthedocs.io/en/latest/viewer.html#functionality).
```

> # DeepESDL datacube resources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# DeepESDL datacubes
```

DeepESDL provides a growing list of relevant variables for Earth System Science. 
Most of them have been derived from Earth Observation, but the compilation also 
includes model or re-analysis data if deemed useful.
DeepESDL is very grateful to all data owners for kindly providing the data sets 

> free of charge. They come without any warranty, neither from the owners, 

Reviewer: and allowing us to process, and redistribute them,

> the DeepESDL team or ESA.

Reviewer: All datacubes generated and distributed by DeepESDL come without any warranty, neither from the owners, from the DeepESDL, nor form ESA.

> At ingestion into the DeepESDL, all data sets are transformed in space and time 

Reviewer: data sets are typically transformed ...

to fit to the common grid of the data cube, a process that necessarily modifies 

> the original. If you are looking for the original data, please follow the links 

Reviewer: the original data.

within the dataset attributes for each variable and contact the data owners.

To access the documentation of available datasets, please have a look in the 
[datasets section](../datasets/datasets.md).

> 

Reviewer: add 4 section here (see above for details).

## Further information

 - The [JupyterLab documentation](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/):
   an in-depth user guide for the JupyterLab interface.
 - [How to Use JupyterLab](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A5YyoCKxEOU):
   a short introductory video tutorial.
 - [Markdown cells](https://jupyter-notebook.readthedocs.io/en/stable/examples/Notebook/Working%20With%20Markdown%20Cells.html),
   a guide to writing Markdown in Jupyter notebooks.

>  - The [xcube documentation](https://xcube.readthedocs.io/): user

Reviewer: memo: xcube documentation to be updated.

server to shut down. When the `Start my server` button appears, you can click
on it to return to the user JupyterLab profiles menu.

### Logging out

To log out, select *Log out* from the *File* menu within JupyterLab. 

Note that your JupyterLab session will continue in the background even after
you have logged out, but will eventually be terminated due to inactivity. 
If you wish to stop your session explicitly,
you can use the hub control panel as described in the 
[Changing a JupyterLab profile](#changing-a-jupyterlab-profile) section above.

### Python environment selection of the Jupyter Kernel

If you wish to use a special set of python packages, you can adjust it in the 
top right corner of the notebook. Next, a drop-down menu will appear, and you 
can select the desired kernel environment from it. 

![img.png](../img/environment.png)

To get a custom environment which suits your needs, please contact the DeepESDL
team directly. 

# DeepESDL xcube viewer

The DeepESDL xcube viewer is reachable at 
https://viewer.earthsystemdatalab.net .

![img.png](../img/xcube-viewer.png)

The viewer contains public datasets only, but will later also provide user/team 

> cubes when logged in. TThe login will be the same as for the DeepESDL JupyterLab.

Author: ```suggestion
cubes when logged in. The login will be the same as for the DeepESDL JupyterLab.
```

the data owners.

To access the documentation of available datasets, please have a look in the 
[datasets section](../datasets/datasets.md).

# DeepESDL datacube generation

The datasets provided by DeepESDL as data resource might not be sufficient 
for your science case. However, this should not stop you from creating the 
resources you need from source input data and enable you to do your research. 
DeepESDL carefully adheres to the reproducibility of dataset resources. Therefore, 
there are two approaches to generate datasets. 
One is fetching the data from an existing datastore without persisting the 
dataset, usually using a Jupyter notebook. 
If a dataset is persisted and furthermore based on input data that 
needs to be e.g. downloaded beforehand or other preprocessing steps are 
performed, then the cube generation recipe approach is the suitable one. 

## Cube generation recipe approach for static data cubes

### Cube specification format
For each data cube, a unique specification is created that describes 
the cubes spatio-temporal dimensions, resolutions, coverages, and the data 
sources used to generate the cube’s target data variables. To specify each 

> cube, a dedicated JSON format is created that fully describes the target 

Author: Further below in the git-repo link

cube’s characteristics. We use a special GeoJSON Feature format for this 
purpose so each cube definition is both human- and machine-readable and can 
be ingested and rendered by a magnitude of existing tools. The GeoJSON 
Feature’s geometry represents the geographical coverage of a cube, while the 
GeoJSONFeature’s properties provide the remaining details. To describe many 
similar cubes, e.g., for using multiple spatial resolutions for same 
variables, a GeoJSON FeatureCollection may be used instead. To validate the 
JSON cube specification files, we provide a dedicated online JSON Schema 
in the DeepESDL dataset-spec GitHub repository:
 https://github.com/deepesdl/dataset-spec/blob/main/dataset-defs/template.schema.json

### Cube generation recipe

The cube generation recipe ensures, that an existing dataset provided by 
DeepESDL can be reproduced by following the recipe. Here we describe the 

> recipe structure of the provided datasets within DeepESDL:  

Author: ```suggestion
recipe structure of the provided datasets within DeepESDL.
```

      Fetch, download,or copy inputs.
*    `cube-gen/${cube-name}/input-preprocess/`   
      Transform, concatenate, convert to interm. Zarr.
*    `cube-gen/${cube-name}/output-merge/`  
      Merge interm. Zarrs to target cube.
*    `cube-gen/${cube-name}/output-postprocess/`   
      Apply any postprocessing.  

Cube generation recipes are designed to be comprehensive, transparent, 
reproducible, and relocatable. That is, with very little configuration 
changes, they should be executable in different environments.

### Dynamic data cubes from Data Stores

Persistently stored data cubes have the advantage that they have a physical 
representation, i.e. they “exists” at a given storage location. That way 
the data can be “frozen” and can be assigned a version and/or a DOI. In 
addition, access to static data cubes persisted in cloud object storage 
usually is fast and scalable. 

However, there are several issues and challenges with static cubes. Data 
sources of data cubes can become outdated,
or are simply updated, like it is the case for new EO data observations 
added to an existing product archive. In such cases, related data cubes should 

> be updated too, hereby creating considerable maintenance effort. In addition,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be updated too, hereby creating considerable maintenance effort and risks for the integrity of the data cube. In addition,
```

the generation of static data cubes is in many cases a plain duplication of 
data that is actually defined and described elsewhere. The data cube must 
ensure to stay in sync with original data sources and metadata.
Finally, static cubes can only satisfy requirements of one user or use 

> casein an optimal way. By definition, they do not allow for streamlined and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
case in an optimal way. By definition, they do not allow for streamlined and 
```

to write as an email at `esdl-support@brockmann-consult.de` and we will see 
if we can already onboard you.

DeepESDL uses a GitHub to authenticate, so if you are already registered as a 
DeepESDL user, please use your GitHub account to log in. 
If your Jupyter server is not already running, you may be presented
with a menu of user JupyterLab profiles to use for your session; there might be 
one or more JupyterLab profiles to choose from, depending on the computational 
resources needs of your team. Please select a suitable profile for 
your current task; it might not always require the profile with the strongest 
computational resources available.
After choosing your environment, you will see a progress bar appearing for a few 
moments while it is started for you. 
The JupyterLab interface will then appear in your web browser, ready for
use.

### Choosing a JupyterLab profile

If you don't already have a running DeepESDL Jupyter session, you will be 
presented with a list of one or more available user JupyterLab profiles when 
you log in. 
A user JupyterLab profile provides a particular combination of pre-installed 
package versions and resource settings. 

> If you have already started your session and need to change JupyterLab profiles, 

Author: ```suggestion
If you have already started your session and need to change the JupyterLab profile, 
```
